

=== PAGE 1 ===

1 
 
 
 
 
Meaning of Business Studies 
Business Studies is an academic subject taught in schools and at university level in 
many countries.  
Its study combines elements of accountancy, finance, marketing, organizational 
studies, human resource management, and operations. Business studies is a broad 
subject, where the range of topics is designed to give the student a general overview 
of the various elements of running a business. 
 


=== PAGE 2 ===

2 
 
What Is a Business? 
The term business refers to an organization or enterprising entity engaged 
in commercial, industrial, or professional activities. Businesses can be for-
profit entities or they can be non-profit organizations that operate to fulfill a 
charitable mission or further a social cause. Businesses range in scale from 
sole proprietorships to international corporations and can range in size 
from small to large. 
How Do You Start a Business? 
There are a number of steps you need to go through in order to start a 
business. This includes conducting market research, developing a business 
plan, seeking capital or other forms of funding, choosing a location and 
business structure, picking the right name, submitting registration paperwork, 
obtaining tax documents (employer and taxpayer IDs), and pulling permits 
and licenses. It's also a good idea to set up a bank account with a financial 
institution to facilitate your everyday banking needs. 
 
Difference between Needs and Wants 
 


=== PAGE 3 ===

3 
 
Needs point out the something you must have for survival. On the other hand, 
wants refers to something which is good to have, but not essential for survival. 
For the purpose of spending and saving money wisely, every person must 
know the difference between needs and wants. 
 
 
What are Needs? 
Needs are the basic requirements or necessities that are essential for your 
survival. In other words, they are the things you have to have, or cannot do 
without. So, what are the basic needs for a human being’s survival? As we all 
know, a human being cannot survive without Oxygen, water and food. In 
addition to these three elements, there are some other needs that are 
essential to live a healthy and happy life. Some of these needs include basic 
health care products, clothing, tools to work, and protective housing. 
Needs can be classified into two types: subjective needs and physical needs. 
The above-described needs such as food, water and clothing belong to physical 
needs. These are the basic needs or physiological needs of a human being. 
Subjective needs are the psychological needs of an individual. These include 
self-esteem, sense of security and love. 
 
What are Wants? 
Wants are desires. Wants are the things that you would like to have. But, they 
are not essential to your survival. Every person has his own set of desires or 
wants. A big house, fancy food, branded clothes; a new car, trip to a foreign 
country, etc. are some of the wants that many people have. Wants can change 
over time. For example, when you were a child, you might have wanted to buy 
a big toy castle. But as you grow older, your tastes and preferences change, so, 
your desires change with them. Although the inability to fulfill a want may not 
cause death or physical illness, it may result in mental distress. 
 
 
Consumer goods are the goods finally used by the consumers to satisfy their 
wants. These goods directly satisfy human wants. Producer goods are those 
goods which are used by the producers to produce more goods or continue 
the process of production. 


=== PAGE 4 ===

4 
 
A sole trader is a single owner business, usually family orientated. A sole 
trader can easily control this type of business because it is small. Limited 
capital is required and there are a few legal formalities. However, they suffer 
from unlimited liability which means that if the business gets bankrupt, the 
owner has to forfeit personal possessions like land papers and personal car. 
Sources of fixed capital include personal savings of the sole trader, loans 
from banks mortgages from building societies, ploughed-back profits. 
 
 
Partnership is a business between two to twenty persons. Each partner needs 
to sign a Deed of Agreement that gives details of capital contributed by each 
partner, rate of interest to be paid on capital, salaries. In a partnership, more 
capital is available compared to a sole trader. Partners can consult each other 
and correct decisions. Partnership can make use of individual skills. However, 
ordinary partners have unlimited liability. There could be conflicts and 
disagreements between partners. Since the membership of a partnership is 
limited, it would be difficult to raise large sums of capital. Sources of fixed 
capital include personal savings of the partners, loans from banks, hire 
purchase and leasing. 
 
Limited companies have limited liability, separate legal identity and continuity. 
These must be filed with the Registrar of Companies. The shareholders elect a 
Board of Directors, usually at an annual general meeting, to run the company 
on their behalf. Companies raise long term finance by issuing debentures and 
shares, using ploughed-back profits, borrowing from banks, using hire 
purchase and leasing facilities. 
 
Private limited companies must use the words ‘limited’ or ‘ltd’. They need to 
have one or more directors and must have a minimum of two shareholders. 
All shareholders have limited liability, while ordinary partners have unlimited 
liability. The maximum number of shareholders is unlimited, which makes it 
easier to raise capital. However, companies unlike partnerships, have to be 
registered. The accounts have to be filed with the Registrar of Companies. 


=== PAGE 5 ===

5 
 
Public limited companies must use the words ‘public limited company’ or ‘plc’. 
They must have a minimum of two directors and two shareholders. Capital is 
easy to raise because shareholders have limited liability, members of the public 
can be invited to buy shares, the shares are quoted on the stock exchange. 
However, the formation is costly in time and money because of the documents 
which have to be submitted to the Registrar of Companies. Coordination 
and communication problems might arise. 
 
Cooperatives are people-centred enterprises owned, controlled and run by 
and for their members to realise their common economic, social, and cultural 
needs and aspirations. Cooperatives bring people together in a democratic and 
equal way. A consumers' cooperative is a business owned by its customers. 
Members vote on major decisions and elect the board of directors from among 
their own number. Retail cooperatives are retailers, such as grocery stores, 
owned by their customers. They should not be confused with retailers' 
cooperatives, whose members are retailers rather than consumers. 
 
 
Businesses vary in size; from small to medium to large. Some are regarded 
as incorporated while others unincorporated. There are sole traders, 
partnerships, limited companies, holding companies and joint stock 
companies. 
Incorporated businesses have the features of having limited liability, where 
firms don’t have to give away their personally possessions in the event of 
a loss. These firms can still continue if bankruptcy occurs and they have a 
separate legal personality. Companies that are regarded as incorporated, 
must be registered under the Companies Act, after the registration process 
is completed, the Registrar of Companies issue a Certificate of Incorporation. 
The Memorandum of Association (the document that sets up the company) 
and Articles of Association (set out how the company is run, governed and 
owned) are regarded as important documents. Some examples include ACI 
HealthCare Limited, United Hospital Limited, Jamuna Resort Limited, etc. 


=== PAGE 6 ===

6 
 
Private Limited Companies are those which tend to be small and medium sized 
businesses. These companies must have the words Limited or Ltd after its 
name and cannot sell shares to the general public. Some examples of Limited 
companies include Elite Motors, Unicode, Progressive Packers and Shippers 
(Pvt) Limited, Dell Service Bangladesh, etc. This type of business entity limits 
owner liability to their shares, limits the number of shareholders to 50 and 
restricts shareholders from publicly trading shares. 
In the light of the above, all the companies are important for a country to 
prosper because it allows a balance within the economy. Jobs can be created 
and those with fewer skills can also prosper for their future. The economic 
development can be kept at a reasonable level and the communication 
along with the interaction will be maintained. 
 
 
A franchise business is a business in which the owners, or "franchisors", sell 
the rights to their business logo, name, and model to third party retail outlets, 
owned by independent, third party operators, called "franchisees". Franchises 
are an extremely common way of doing business. 
 
The role of the franchisor 
They are motivated to share their experience and know-how with their 
franchisees. They provide their franchisees with the tools needed to operate 
their businesses to brand standards. They are focused on ensuring that 
each franchisee operates to system standards. 
 
The role of the franchisee 
To ensure that all employees are properly trained and the franchise is properly 
staffed at all times. To advertise and promote the franchise and its approved 
products and services according to the guidelines provided by the franchisor. 


=== PAGE 7 ===

7 
 
Stakeholder 
• A stakeholder has a vested interest in a company and can either 
affect or be affected by a business' operations and performance. 
• Typical stakeholders are investors, employees, customers, suppliers, 
communities, governments, or trade associations. 
• An entity's stakeholders can be both internal or external to the 
organization. 
 
Stakeholders can be internal or external to an organization. Internal 
stakeholders are people whose interest in a company comes through a 
direct relationship, such as employment, ownership, or investment. 
External stakeholders are those who do not directly work with a company 
but are affected somehow by the actions and outcomes of the business. 
Suppliers, creditors, and public groups are all considered external stakeholders. 
 
 
Primary, secondary and tertiary sectors 
There are three main types of industry in which firms operate. 
These sectors form a chain of production which provides customers with 
finished goods or services. 
• Primary production: this involves acquiring raw materials. For example, 
metals and coal have to be mined, oil drilled from the ground, rubber tapped 
from trees, foodstuffs farmed and fish trawled. This is sometimes known 
as extractive production. 
• Secondary production: this is the manufacturing and assembly process. 
It involves converting raw materials into components, for example, making 
plastics from oil. It also involves assembling the product, eg building houses, 
bridges and roads. 
• Tertiary production: this refers to the commercial services that support the 
production and distribution process, eg insurance, transport, advertising, 
warehousing and other services such as teaching and health care. 


=== PAGE 8 ===

8 
 
Induction training is important as it enables a new recruit to become 
productive as quickly as possible. It can avoid costly mistakes by recruits not 
knowing the procedures or techniques of their new jobs. The length of 
induction training will vary from job to job and will depend on the complexity 
of the job, the size of the business and the level or position of the job within 
the business. 
The following areas may be included in induction training: 
• Learning about the duties of the job 
• Meeting new colleagues 
• Seeing the layout of the premises 
• Learning the values and aims of the business 
• Learning about the internal workings and policies of the business 
On-the-job training 
With on the job training, employees receive training whilst remaining in the 
workplace. 
The main methods of one-the-job training include: 
• Demonstration / instruction - showing the trainee how to do the job 
• Coaching - a more intensive method of training that involves a close 
working relationship between an experienced employee and the trainee 
• Job rotation - where the trainee is given several jobs in succession, to 
gain experience of a wide range of activities (e.g. a graduate 
management trainee might spend periods in several different 
departments) 
• Projects - employees join a project team - which gives them exposure to 
other parts of the business and allow them to take part in new activities. 
Most successful project teams are "multi-disciplinary" 
Training is basically a teaching and learning activity carried on to enhance the 
skills, knowledge, and abilities of the employees working in the organization. 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 9 ===

9 
 
Off-the-job training 
This occurs when employees are taken away from their place of work to be 
trained. 
Common methods of off-the-job training include: 
• Day release (employee takes time off work to attend a local college or 
training centre) 
• Distance learning / evening classes 
• Block release courses - which may involve several weeks at a local 
college 
• Sandwich courses - where the employee spends a longer period of time 
at college (e.g. six months) before returning to work 
• Sponsored courses in higher education 
• Self-study, computer-based training 
The main advantages and disadvantages of this form of training can be 
summarised as follows: 
 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Generally most cost-effective
Employees 
are 
actually 
productive 
Opportunity to learn whilst
doing 
Training alongside real 
colleagues 
Quality depends on ability of trainer and time 
available 
Bad habits might be passed on 
Learning environment may not be conducive 
Potential disruption to production 
 
 
 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
A wider range of skills or 
qualifications can be obtained 
Can 
learn 
from 
outside 
specialists or experts 
More expensive – e.g. transport and 
accommodation 
Lost working time and potential output 
from employee 
New employees may still need some 
induction training 
Employees can be more 
confident when starting job 
The advantages and disadvantages of this form of training can be summarised 
as follows: 


=== PAGE 10 ===

10 
 
Employees now have new skills/qualifications 
and may leave for better jobs 
 
Recruitment 
Recruitment is the process from identifying that the business needs to employ 
someone up to the point where applications have arrived at the business. 
A vacancy arises when an employee resigns from a job or is dismissed by the 
management. When a vacancy arises, a job analysis has to be prepared. 
A job analysis identifies and records the tasks and responsibilities relating 
to the job. It will tell the managers what the job post is for. 
 
 
Then a job description is prepared that outlines the responsibilities and duties 
to be carried out by someone employed to do the job. It will have information 
about the conditions of employment (salary, working hours, and pension 
scheme), training offered, opportunities for promotion etc. This is given to 
all prospective candidates so they know what exactly they will be required 
and expected to do. 
Once this has been done, the H.R. department will draw up a job specification, 
a document that outlines the requirements, qualifications, expertise, skills, 
physical/personal characteristics etc. required by an employee to be able 
to take up the job. 


=== PAGE 11 ===

11 
 
Advertising the vacancy 
 
Internal recruitment is when a vacancy is filled by an existing employee 
of the business. 
Advantages: 
• Saves time and money- no need for advertising and interviewing 
• Person already known to business 
• Person knows business’ ways of working 
• Motivating for other employees to see their colleagues being promoted- 
urging them to work hard 
Disadvantages: 
• No new skills and experience coming into the business 
• Jealousy among workers 
 
External recruitment is when a vacancy is filled by someone who is not an 
existing employee and will be new to the business. External recruitment 
needs to be advertised, unlike internal recruitment. This can be done in 
local/national newspapers, specialist magazines and journals, job centres 
run by the government (where job vacancies are posted and given to 
interested people; usually for unskilled or semi-skilled jobs) or 
even recruitment agencies (who will recruit and send along candidates 
to the company when they request it). 
When advertising a job, the business needs to decide what should be included 
in the advertisement, where it should be advertised, how much it will cost 
and whether it will be cost-effective. 
When a person is interested in a job, they should apply for it by sending 
in a curriculum vitae (CV) or resume, this will detail the person’s qualifications, 
experience, qualities and skills. The business will use these to see which 
candidates match the job specification. It will also include statements of 
why the candidate wants the job and why he/she feels they would be 
suitable for the job. 
Selection 
Applicants who are shortlisted will be interviewed by the H.R. manager. 
They will also call up the referee provided by the applicant (a referee could 
be the previous employer or colleagues who can give a confidential opinion 
about the applicant’s reliability, honesty and suitability for the job). 
Interviews will allow the manager to assess: 


=== PAGE 12 ===

12 
 
Employment contracts can be part-time or full-time. 
• the applicant’s ability to do the job 
• personal qualities of the applicant 
• character and personality of applicant 
In addition to interviews, firms can conduct certain tests to select the best 
candidate. This could include skills tests (ability to do the job), aptitude tests 
(candidate’s potential to gain additional skills), personality tests (what kind of a 
personality the candidate has- will it be suitable for the job?), group situation 
tests (how they manage and work in teams) etc. 
When a successful candidate has been selected the others must be sent a 
letter of rejection. 
 
The contract of employment: a legal agreement between the employer and 
the employee listing the rights and responsibilities of workers. It will include: 
• the name of employer and employee 
• job title 
• date when employment will begin 
• hours to work 
• rate of pay and other benefits 
• when payment is made 
• holiday entitlement 
• the amount of notice to be given to terminate the employment that 
the employer or employee must give to end the employment etc. 
 
 
Part-time employment is often considered to be between 1 and 30-35 
hours a week whereas full-time employment will usually work 35 hours 
or more a week. 
 
Advantages to employer of part-time employment (disadvantages of 
full-time employment to employer): 
• more flexible hours of work 
• easier to ask employees just to work at busy times 
• easier to extend business opening/operating hours by working evenings 
or at weekends 
• works lesser hours so employee is willing to accept lower pay 
• less expensive than employing and paying full-time workers. 


=== PAGE 13 ===

13 
 
Disadvantages to employer of part-time employment (advantages 
of full-time employment to employers): 
 
• less likely to be trained because the workers see the job as temporary 
• takes longer to recruit two part-time workers than one full-time worker 
• can be less committed to the business/ more likely to leave and go get 
another job 
• less likely to be promoted because they will not have gained the skills 
and experience as full-time employees 
• more difficult to communicate with part-time workers when they are 
not in work- all work at different times. 
 
Privatisation is the process of transferring an enterprise or industry from 
the public sector to the private sector. For example, airport operation, 
data processing, vehicle maintenance. 
 
Potential benefits of privatisation 
 
1. Improved efficiency 
The main argument for privatisation is that private companies have a profit 
incentive to cut costs and be more efficient. 
 
2. Lack of political interference 
It is argued governments make poor economic managers. They are motivated 
by political pressures rather than sound economic and business sense. 
 
3. Shareholders 
It is argued that a private firm has pressure from shareholders to perform 
efficiently. If the firm is inefficient then the firm could be subject to a takeover. 
 
4. Increased competition 
Often privatisation of state-owned monopolies occurs alongside deregulation – 
i.e. policies to allow more firms to enter the industry and increase the 
competitiveness of the market. It is this increase in competition that can 
be the greatest spur to improvements in efficiency. 


=== PAGE 14 ===

14 
 
Disadvantages of privatisation 
 
1. Natural monopoly 
A natural monopoly occurs when the most efficient number of firms in 
an industry is one. For example, tap water has very significant fixed costs. 
Therefore there is no scope for having competition amongst several firms. 
 
2. Public interest 
There are many industries which perform an important public service, e.g., 
health care, education and public transport. In these industries, the profit 
motive shouldn’t be the primary objective of firms and the industry. 
 
3. Government loses out on potential dividends. 
Many of the privatised companies in the UK are quite profitable. This 
means the government misses out on their dividends, instead going to 
wealthy shareholders. 
 
4. Problem of regulating private monopolies. 
Privatisation creates private monopolies, such as the water companies and 
rail companies. These need regulating to prevent abuse of monopoly power. 
Therefore, there is still need for government regulation, similar to under 
state ownership. 
 
Retailers are the final link in the channel of distribution. A retailer purchases 
in bulk from the wholesalers and sells the products to the customers in 
small quantities. The aim of a retailer is to achieve maximum satisfaction 
by exceeding their expectations and delivering exceptional services. 
 
Services provided by retailers: to provide the goods that consumers want, 
to provide goods in suitable quantity for consumers, to provide the goods 
when customers want them, providing credit facilities, advertising and 
window displays, introducing new products. 


=== PAGE 15 ===

15 
 
International trade has flourished over the years due to the many benefits it 
has offered to different countries across the globe. International trade is the 
exchange of services, goods, and capital among various countries and regions, 
without much hindrance. The international trade accounts for a good part 
of a country’s gross domestic product. With the help of modern production 
techniques, 
highly 
advanced 
transportation 
systems, 
transnational 
corporations, outsourcing of manufacturing and services, and rapid 
industrialisation, the international trade system is growing and spreading 
very fast. 
Some important benefits of International Trade include: 
Enhancing the domestic competitiveness 
Taking advantage of international trade technology 
Increasing sales and profits 
Extending sales potential of the existing products 
Maintaining cost competitiveness in the domestic market 
Enhancing potential for expansion of your business 
Gaining a global market share 
Reducing 
dependence 
on 
existing 
markets 
Stabilising seasonal market fluctuations 
 
In international trade, imports and exports play a crucial part in trade. Imports 
are all about foreign goods entering a domestic economy, whereas exports are 
all about home products moving to foreign countries for business effectiveness 
and competition. 
 
Visible trade is the trade in goods between countries, invisible trade is the 
trade in services between countries. The balance of trade or visible balance = 
visible exports-visible imports. The invisible balance = invisible exports-invisible 
imports. The balance of payments on 
 
Current account = (visible exports + invisible exports) - (visible imports + 
invisible imports). Deficit is a loss and surplus is a profit in the balance of 
payments. 


=== PAGE 16 ===

16 
 
A trade bloc is a type of intergovernmental agreement, often part of a regional 
intergovernmental organisation, where barriers to trade (tariffs and others) 
are reduced or eliminated among the participating states. Trade blocs can be 
stand-alone agreements between several states (such as the North American 
Free Trade Agreement) or part of a regional organization (such as the 
European Union). Depending on the level of economic integration, trade blocs 
can be classified as preferential trading areas, free-trade areas, customs 
unions, common markets, or economic and monetary unions. 
 
With the help of trading blocs a removal of tariffs within trading bloc countries 
will benefit from a common external tariff. This also allows a free movement 
of labour, capital and goods from one place to another. The positive impact 
of trading blocs on countries and businesses ensure better scope for 
improvement and market share. 
 
Difficulties facing exporters: there are many problems faced by exporters 
all over the world and some of the most common ones include language, 
distance, methods of payment, differing consumer wants, documentation 
and currency exchange. 
 
Multinationals are companies with significant production operations in 
at least two countries, for example, Shell and DHL. With the help of 
multinationals, employment increases in the country, competition is another 
major benefit because the businesses can expand. Training facilities tend to 
increase for the local labour force. World class goods are cheaper and many 
countries can enjoy products from different countries. However, outflows 
of money occur because the home country would invest and later take back 
most of their finance to their own country. A worsening of the balance of 
payment will also occur because the multinational remits (sends) profits 
to its home country. 
